Welcome to an update for the Power Basic for Beginners YouTube channel. We have recently gained a few new subscribers to the channel and as it's some time since our last update then this short video should provide some useful information to assist you in getting the most from the channel. As you can see we're now on the Power Basic for Beginners YouTube channel. There are currently 426 videos on this channel, covering many topics on both the Power Basic Windows and Console Compilers. If we click on the More section here, we can see that source files for these projects are available on an external website, this one here, the GSF Software website. If we go to that link, it takes us to this page. This site is in fact an index to the YouTube channel, indexing all the videos which are on the channel. On the Recently Added page we have all the recent videos that have been added to the channel. As you can see, each video is listed separately. We have a compiler or topic, which is an icon to show what type of video it is, in this case a podcast and the next one down is a video on the Power Basic Windows compiler. This website also charts the videos for my Hardware channel, which are shown by this icon here. Videos on purely console applications are shown with this icon, and videos which cover both the console and the Windows Compilers are shown again with a different icon. So apart from the obvious details of the subject of the video and the date on which it was uploaded to YouTube, we also have a short description. However, the website goes further, it not only gives you a link to the YouTube video itself, but it gives you keywords. If you are interested in videos on a similar subject, you can click on a keyword. This brings up a separate page, in this case all the videos with the podcast keyword. If we click on the intro keyword, we'll be taken to 47 videos, which are all introduction to Power Basic videos. Additionally, if there is any source code associated with a video, then there will be an icon in the source view column, and if you click on that, you will see the actual source code of the core Power Basic project file. This allows you to view the source code quite easily from this site. Additionally, if you wish to download all the files for this particular project, there is a zip files download icon. Clicking on that will allow you to download the zip file. The GitHub link will take you to GitHub, where you can view and download the files from here. This page only covers those videos which have been added recently. If you are interested in videos purely for the console compiler, if you click on that, you will get a list of all the videos to do with the console compiler. Again, with keywords and the ability to download or view the source code for each of these files. If you are interested purely in the Windows compiler, you can do the same for it. There is a section for videos which cover both Windows and console compilers. For third party add-ons, we have a section for that too. And for third party videos that cover both the Windows and console compilers, there is again a separate page. Again for Power Basic introductions, Projects and Design, and we have added a new entry of podcasts. We now have prepared a number of audio podcasts, which link to videos which have already been uploaded. These videos give you the opportunity to listen to an audio discussion on the topic of a particular video which has already been uploaded. And the last two options in here allow you a bit more flexibility. If you are interested in a specific keyword, for example browser, you can click on the browser keyword. And this will give you a list of all the videos which have that keyword. And the library files allow you to view the source code of libraries used within the projects, by clicking on the source view icon. This allows you, regardless of where you are in the world, the ability to look at source code for Power Basic. And as always, this website does not use cookies or any similar tracking technologies. And should allow you an easier method of actually finding YouTube videos to watch. Hopefully you'll find this website of use in your Power Basic coding. But that's it for today. Thank you for watching.
